Hitting the shuttle Columbia seconds after liftoff, as you watch it over and
over, you see it clearer. More detailed, more alarming than anything you've seen
before. NASA couldn't believe simple foam could destroy an 89 ton spacecraft.
NASA was wrong. You see the hit, you say, ouch, that hurt. Doesn't that set off
alarm bells? It should have. We literally have dozens and dozens of pieces of
evidence all pointing in the same direction. Just today, new evidence about what
caused the shuttle Columbia to break apart. We have found the smoking gun. I
kept insisting we can't rule out a flight safety issue. In other words, we got
the shuttle back before with foam damage. So let's hope we can do it again. It
wasn't hope. Hope is not a management method I'm familiar with at all. It's
really getting, uh, really bright out there. Just lost four separate temperature
transducers on the left side of the vehicle. Look at the chunks coming off the
end. Something has gone terribly wrong here. Why did you say lock the doors?
It's one of those moments in your life where you say, I can't believe this is
happening. She goes, Mom, is Daddy okay? I said, sweetie, I don't think he is.
Looks like NASA has lost all seven astronauts. This is all that is left of the
space shuttle Columbia. Nearly 84,000 pieces of charred debris arrayed
throughout a massive hangar at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Over the
next hour, you're going to hear the first-hand minute-by-minute accounts of
Columbia's last voyage, from the people who lived it and the people who
investigated it. Good evening, I'm Charles Gibson. You have read the headlines
and you saw the breakup, but tonight for the first time, you will hear the
inside story of Columbia's final mission. We'll be back in 60 seconds.
Put them Big Macs up, y'all! Come on, come on. Somebody say to all beef patties,
special sauce, lettuce, cheese. To all beef patties, special sauce, lettuce,
cheese. Pickles, onions on a sesame seed bun. Pickles, onions on a sesame seed
bun. To all beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese. Pickles, onions on a
sesame seed bun.
And as a matter of fact, to be exact. Nothing needs like a Big Mac. There's
flowers, music, photographer. Everyone's going to see our smiles. Before their
wedding, 100 couples use New Colgate Simply White Night once a night. It absorbs
fast. I just closed my mouth and went to bed. 14 days and they're whiter. It's
that easy. New Colgate Simply White Night. Guaranteed. Want to see fewer
wrinkles but not ready for chemical peels or injections? Neutrogena Healthy Skin
Anti-Wrinkle Cream has retinol, essential for skin cell regeneration. It's
dermatologists proven to visibly reduce lines and wrinkles. Would you use it? I
would. Neutrogena Healthy Skin Anti-Wrinkle Cream. Columbia. Final mission
returns once again. Charles Gibson. This really is the nerve center of NASA.
Mission control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. On the morning of
February 1st, there were 20 engineers and flight directors in this room, each of
them monitoring thousands of bits of data coming back from the space shuttle
Columbia. After 16 days in space, the seven astronauts on the shuttle were just
32 minutes from touchdown.
February 1st, 2003, landing day, 8.44 a.m. Traveling at 17,000 miles an hour,
Columbia begins its fiery descent through the Earth's atmosphere.
outside the environment is unforgiving the temperature 3,000 degrees super hot
gases flicker like lightning
max G and C are ready by max are ready change is go mission control has run
through its checklist with Columbia pilot Willie McCool and you're ready Willie
no delta Flight Director Leroy Cain is in charge. When we came in that morning
and began to get ready for our department preparation and entry activities, it
was right, right down the middle, normal. Just under 30 minutes to touchdown for
Columbia now. At Kennedy space center in Florida, family and onlookers gather
near the runway. John Clark, astronaut Laurel Clark's husband, is waiting with
their eight year old son Ian. The kids are all out in the grass, running around
and playing and having a blast. Columbia's altitude now 54 miles as it continues
to descend into the atmosphere. 8.48 a.m., Mechanical Systems Officer Jeff Kling
is monitoring Columbia's descent. Shuttle was very ready systems-wise to come
in. The weather was perfect. It was going to be an absolutely perfect entry. At
8.54 a.m., Kling is the first to notice a problem and notifies Kane. FYI, I've
just lost four separate temperature transducers on the left side of the vehicle.
Four high return temps? Okay, is there anything common to them? DSC or MDM or
anything? There is no commonality. No commonality. At about that time, in
Nevada, an amateur astronomer is filming the shuttle's reentry. Here we come
approaching Venus. Whoa! Holy crap, that was weird. It's going really fast. Just
two minutes later, the shuttle is traveling over Arizona, another home video.
Look at the chunks coming off of it. What the heck is that? Small pieces of the
shuttle are breaking off, but incredibly no one, neither mission control nor the
crew, is aware of it. GNC flight. Flight GNC. Everything looked good to you?
Control and rates and everything is nominal, right? So far, fly we have good
trims I don't see anything out of the ordinary. Ok. Then I lose some more
sensors in the left wheel well. The tires and the heat pressure on left outboard
left inboard both tires. I felt that icy water in my veins. Structural engineer
Rodney Rocha is monitoring data in a backroom with other engineers. It went off
in my head. It's happening. We're having a wing burn through. We're having
something terrible is happening in the wheel well. 8.59 a.m., Mission Control
radios, Commander Rick Husband. End Columbia, Houston. We see your tire pressure
messages and we did not copy your last. Roger. The transmission suddenly falls
off. It's cut off right in the middle, just like that. That got my attention,
because that is way out of the range of anything we've ever had. In flight
EECOM? EECOM. I've got four temperature sensors on the bondline data that are
off-scale O. The environmental officer says now she has lost some temperatures
on the left side of the vehicle. The data that I look at is no longer there. A
completely different system that they look at is no longer there. A cascading
event has happened on the left side of the vehicle, and we're no longer
communicating with it. We're out of control in Mission Control.
Columbian Houston, comm check.
Columbia Houston, UHF comm check.
The seconds become very long. As I'm watching the clock, it drags on. Flight 01,
are you expecting tracking?
One minute to go, flight. We should've had air-to-ground communications and
tracking and things. When we didn't have that, that's when the butterflies
started to appear, that sinking feeling in the pit of your stomach. Bill Reedy,
a former astronaut and now a top NASA administrator, is waiting near the runway
with his boss, NASA chief, Sean O'Keefe. A look of absolute deep, deep concern
on Bill Reedy's face told me everything before he said a word. At mission
control, Phil Engelhoff, a mission operations official, gets a call from a
colleague who had just seen the shuttle breaking up over Texas. Engelhoff shares
the news with Cain.
GC flight. GC flight. Fly GC. Lock the doors. Copy. No data, no phone calls, no
transmissions anywhere into or out. FCO8 contingency plan procedure. FCO8
checklist. Page 2.8-5. It's one of those moments in your life where you say, I
can't believe this is happening. But I realized that it really was happening and
that I still had a responsibility to lead the team through it. Astronaut Rick
Husband's wife, Evelyn, is waiting for him to land. We watched the clock go to
zero, and then it starts counting up again. And you just, I don't know how to
explain it, but you just have that sick, sick feeling. Apparently it just
appears that something happened with the orbiter- Then I heard someone say, we
need to get the families back to crew quarters. Laura grabs my arm. She goes,
Mom, is Daddy okay? And I said, Sweetie, I don't think he is. But I don't know
anything. NASA says they have lost communication- The head of a flight crew
comes in, and he goes, we lost contact with a vehicle. At the altitude that this
happened, it's highly likely this is not survivable, but we don't have
confirmation. But I don't want to give you false hope. There was a massive
amount of crying and the kids were screaming. It was horrible sounds, horrible.
Flight controllers here in mission control are securing all their information,
notes and data gathered from the spacecraft. Yeah, RCC, the rescue coordination
center, is mobilizing to that area. Got me. The thought went through my mind at
a time that if somehow the crew module stayed intact long enough and low enough
and slow enough, that maybe some of the crew members could have got out. Cain's
tear says it all. There would be no miracles. at 9 29 a.m. NASA declares an
emergency video of the shuttle breakup taken by a local TV station is broadcast
nationally the very nature of what we do is we're there to help and there are
literally